---
layout: post
title: "Cross site request forgery (CSRF)"
thumbnail: crossroads-480.jpg
date: 2019-01-02
---

This article describes how cross site request forgery works, how sites defend against it and how to bypass these defenses.

## What is CSRF?

When you are logged in to a certain site, you typically have a session. The identifier of that session is stored in a cookie in your browser, and is sent with every request to that site. Even if some other site triggers a request, the cookie is sent along with the request and the request is handled as if the logged in user performed it.

Cross site request forgery (CSRF) is performing a "forged" request from the attacker's site to another site where the victim is logged in. If that site is vulnerable, any action that the user could normally perform on the site can now be performed by the attacker.

## What requests can be performed?

CSRF works by triggering a request from one site to another. However, not all requests can be sent just like that. The request has to conform to some [arbitrary rules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS#Simple_requests). Requests with the following properties are allowed:

*  The request method is one of
    * GET
    * HEAD
    * POST
* The request does not use any custom headers.
* The content type is one of 
    * application/x-www-form-urlencoded
    * multipart/form-data
    * text/plain

Any other request triggers a preflight request. This is an extra check on whether your request is allowed, and your request will most likely be blocked.

Notably, you can't perform a request with content type `application/json`, which is pretty popular in web apps. However, you can still post JSON using a content type of `text/plain`, and it depends on the application whether this works or not.

## Which actions should be protected against CSRF?

Requests that have some side-effect should be protected against CSRF. For example,

* requests that modify data in the database, such as saving or deleting an entry.
* requests that modify data in the current session, such as changing the user's language or logging out of the application.
* requests that perform some action, such as sending an email or sending a text message.

With CSRF the vulnerability is that any other website can trigger this side effect. If there is no side effect the attacker can still trigger the request, but that doesn't do anything.

### GET and POST

We are interested in requests with some side effect. 
Most of the time these are POST requests, but not always. Some sites do have CSRF protection on all POST requests, but not on GET requests. In that case it is interesting to search for a GET request that performs some action.

## Which actions are interesting for CSRF?

An interesting action to perform through CSRF is [changing the password](/2018/08/15/changing-your-password-with-csrf-in-icehrm/) or email address, as this results in account takeover. For passwords this is often impossible since you have to fill in the old password, but for email addresses this is sometimes forgotten.

One request that can often be forged is to log out the user. On most sites, simply visiting `/logout` or something like that will log out the user. This is technically CSRF, although with a rather mundane impact.

## Common CSRF protections

### Random token

CSRF protection is typically done by sending a random token along with any request. The attacker wouldn't have this token and thus can't forge a valid request.

If implemented correctly, this is an adequate protection against CSRF. If a site uses this method, you can check for the following weaknesses:

* Is the token actually checked everywhere? That a token is present in the request is no guarantee that requests without tokens are blocked.
* Is the token long and random enough? If the token is short and predictable, it may be possible to brute force it during a CSRF attack.
* Is the token generated using a secure cryptographic random number generator? Using `rand()` often [does not provide enough security](/2016/02/11/cracking-php-rand/).
* Is the token bound to a user's session? If a token can be used with another user's session, the attacker can use his own token in the CSRF attack.

### Referer check

Sometimes the site verifies the Referer or Origin headers to verify that the request came from the site itself. This can be secure, but is a bit harder to get correct. 

Sometimes the site checks whether "https://www.example.com/" is contained in the Referer, in which case it can be attacked by using "https://www.attacker.com/?https://www.example.com/" as the attacking page. Sometimes the check isn't done if the Referer header is missing, which the attacker can trigger through a [referrer policy](/2017/06/21/bypass-csrf-check-using-referrer-policy/).

### Same-site cookies

Finally, [same-site cookies](/2016/04/14/preventing-csrf-with-samesite-cookie-attribute/) provide adequate protection against CSRF, but only for browsers that support them.

The same-site cookie flag has two possible values:
* Lax, only POST requests are stripped of authentication.
* Strict, all requests are stripped of authentication.

This means that if there is a GET request that is vulnerable to CSRF, it is still vulnerable even when Lax same-site cookies are used.

## Conclusion

Cross site request forgery remains a threat that is hard to defend against. Web app frameworks often offer a protection against CSRF, but often every action that needs protection has to be marked explicitly. This makes that modern web applications still contain some CSRF vulnerabilities.

## Read more

* [CORS and RFC1918](https://wicg.github.io/cors-rfc1918/)
* [Robust Defenses for Cross-Site Request Forgery](http://www.adambarth.com/papers/2008/barth-jackson-mitchell-b.pdf)
* [Cross-Site Request Forgeries: Exploitation and Prevention](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/shmat/courses/library/zeller.pdf)